---
layout: page
title: dailyArxiv
permalink: /dailyarxiv/
description: A daily update of the arxiv
nav: true
nav_order: 6
display_categories: [work, fun]
horizontal: false
mathjax: true
aside:
  toc: true
---

 Updated on 2025.03.20
# neutrino (19)

2025-03-19, **No Flavor Anisotropy in the High-Energy Neutrino Sky Upholds Lorentz Invariance**, Bernanda Telalovic et.al., [2503.15468v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15468v1)

 Discovering Lorentz-invariance violation (LIV) would upend the foundations of modern physics. Because LIV effects grow with energy, high-energy astrophysical neutrinos provide the most sensitive tests of Lorentz invariance in the neutrino sector. We examine an understudied yet phenomenologically rich LIV signature: compass asymmetries, where neutrinos of different flavors propagate preferentially along different directions. Using the directional flavor composition of high-energy astrophysical neutrinos, i.e., the abundances of $\nu\_{e}$, $\nu\_{\mu}$, and $\nu\_{\tau}$ across the sky, we find no evidence of LIV-induced flavor anisotropy in 7.5 years of IceCube High-Energy Starting Events. Thus, we place upper limits on the values of hundreds of LIV parameters with operator dimensions 2-8, tightening existing limits by orders of magnitude and bounding hundreds of parameters for the first time.

2025-03-19, **Classification of Electron and Muon Neutrino Events for the ESS$ν$SB Near Water Cherenkov Detector using Graph Neural Networks**, J. Aguilar et.al., [2503.15247v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15247v1)

 In the effort to obtain a precise measurement of leptonic CP-violation with the ESS$\nu$SB experiment, accurate and fast reconstruction of detector events plays a pivotal role. In this work, we examine the possibility of replacing the currently proposed likelihood-based reconstruction method with an approach based on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). As the likelihood-based reconstruction method is reasonably accurate but computationally expensive, one of the benefits of a Machine Learning (ML) based method is enabling fast event reconstruction in the detector development phase, allowing for easier investigation of the effects of changes to the detector design. Focusing on classification of flavour and interaction type in muon and electron events and muon- and electron neutrino interaction events, we demonstrate that the GNN reconstructs events with greater accuracy than the likelihood method for events with greater complexity, and with increased speed for all events. Additionally, we investigate the key factors impacting reconstruction performance, and demonstrate how separation of events by pion production using another GNN classifier can benefit flavour classification.

2025-03-19, **Measurement of the A dependence of the muon neutrino charged-current quasielastic-like cross section as a function of muon and proton kinematics at $<$E$_ν>\sim$6 GeV**, J. Kleykamp et.al., [2503.15047v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15047v1)

 The first simultaneous measurements of the $\nu\_{\mu}$ quasielastic-like cross section on C, CH, H$\_2$0, Fe, and Pb targets as a function of kinematic imbalance variables in the plane transverse to the incoming neutrino direction are presented. These variables combine the muon and proton information to provide a new way to disentangle the effects of the nucleus in quasielastic-like processes. The data were obtained using a wide-band $\nu\_{\mu}$ beam with $<$E$\_{\nu}>\sim$6 GeV. Cross-section ratios of the different target materials to CH are also shown. These measurements are used to explore the nature of the cross-section $A$-scaling, as well as initial and final state interaction effects. Comparisons are made to predictions from a number of commonly used neutrino Monte Carlo event generators. The range of predictions of the different models tends to cover the data but the degree and consistency of the agreement suffers in regions, and on higher $A$ targets, where the final state interactions are expected to be more pronounced.

2025-03-19, **Lepton Flavor Violation of Z Gauge Boson Decays in Supersymmetric Type-III Seesaw Model**, Vael Hajahmad et.al., [2503.15030v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15030v1)

 In this study, we investigate the lepton flavor violation (LFV) of Z gauge boson decaying into two different flavor charged leptons $Z\longrightarrow l\_i l\_j$ ($Z\longrightarrow \tau \mu$, $Z\longrightarrow \tau e$ and $Z\longrightarrow \mu e$). This work is performed in the framework of the constrained minimal supersymmetric standard model (CMSSM) which is extended by the type-III seesaw mechanism. By considering constraints from the current experimental bounds on neutrino and supersymmetric particle masses, we calculate the branching ratios of the LFV of Z boson decays. The numerical results are found to be $1.30 \times {10}^{-9}$ for both the $\tau \mu$ and $\tau e$ decay channels and $6.40 \times {10}^{-10}$ for the $\mu e$ channel. After applying the constraints from the experimental bounds on the radiative two body decays $l\_{i}\rightarrow l\_{j} \gamma$, the branching ratios of the LFV of Z boson decays get an additional suppression of $10^{-3}$ for the $\tau \mu$ and $\tau e$ decay channels and $10^{-8}$ for the $\mu e$ channel. The prediction of the branching ratios is found to be several orders of magnitude below the current experimental bounds for both scenarios. Thus the LFV of Z boson decays could be observed with low likelihood in the future collider experiments.

2025-03-19, **Using Lithium and Beryllium to Study Structure and Evolution of Rotating Stars**, Wuming Yang et.al., [2503.14804v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14804v1)

 The chemical composition of the Sun is still a highly controversial issue. No solar model has yet been able to simultaneously reproduce the solar lithium and beryllium abundances, along with helioseismic results, including the rotation profile. Lithium and beryllium are fragile elements that are highly sensitive to the physical conditions, as well as to transport and mixing processes within and below the convective zone (CZ). Uncovering the transport mechanisms responsible for the depletion of Li and Be in the Sun is crucial for using them as tools to understand stellar interiors and the associated transport and mixing processes. We constructed rotating solar models based on Magg's abundance scale, incorporating the effects of convective overshoot and magnetic fields. The rotating model exhibits superior sound speed and density profile and successfully reproduces the observed ratios $r\_{02}$ and $r\_{13}$. It also matches the seismically inferred CZ depth, surface helium abundance, and rotation profile, as well as the detected Li and Be abundances and neutrino fluxes within $1\sigma$. The depletion of Li is dominated by convective overshoot and rotational mixing, while Be depletion is primarily driven by gravitational settling and rotational mixing. The presence of the tachocline accelerates Li depletion but slows down Be depletion. These distinct depletion mechanisms result in the surface abundances of Li and Be evolving differently over time.

2025-03-18, **Data Release 1 of the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument**, DESI Collaboration et.al., [2503.14745v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14745v1)

 In 2021 May the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) collaboration began a 5-year spectroscopic redshift survey to produce a detailed map of the evolving three-dimensional structure of the universe between $z=0$ and $z\approx4$. DESI's principle scientific objectives are to place precise constraints on the equation of state of dark energy, the gravitationally driven growth of large-scale structure, and the sum of the neutrino masses, and to explore the observational signatures of primordial inflation. We present DESI Data Release 1 (DR1), which consists of all data acquired during the first 13 months of the DESI main survey, as well as a uniform reprocessing of the DESI Survey Validation data which was previously made public in the DESI Early Data Release. The DR1 main survey includes high-confidence redshifts for 18.7M objects, of which 13.1M are spectroscopically classified as galaxies, 1.6M as quasars, and 4M as stars, making DR1 the largest sample of extragalactic redshifts ever assembled. We summarize the DR1 observations, the spectroscopic data-reduction pipeline and data products, large-scale structure catalogs, value-added catalogs, and describe how to access and interact with the data. In addition to fulfilling its core cosmological objectives with unprecedented precision, we expect DR1 to enable a wide range of transformational astrophysical studies and discoveries.

2025-03-18, **Constraints on Neutrino Physics from DESI DR2 BAO and DR1 Full Shape**, W. Elbers et.al., [2503.14744v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14744v1)

 The Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) Collaboration has obtained robust measurements of baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO) in the redshift range, $0.1 < z < 4.2$, based on the Lyman-$\alpha$ forest and galaxies from Data Release 2 (DR2). We combine these measurements with external cosmic microwave background (CMB) data from Planck and ACT to place our tightest constraints yet on the sum of neutrino masses. Assuming the cosmological $\Lambda$CDM model and three degenerate neutrino states, we find $\sum m\_\nu<0.0642$ eV (95%). When accounting for neutrino oscillation constraints, we find a preference for the normal mass ordering and an upper bound of $m\_l < 0.023$ eV (95%) on the lightest neutrino mass. However, we determine using frequentist and Bayesian methods that our constraints are in moderate tension with the lower limits derived from neutrino oscillations. Correcting for the physical boundary at zero mass, we report a 95% Feldman-Cousins upper bound of $\sum m\_\nu<0.053$ eV, breaching the lower limit from neutrino oscillations. Considering a more general Bayesian analysis with an effective cosmological neutrino mass parameter, $\sum m\_{\nu,\mathrm{eff}}$, that allows for negative energy densities and removes unsatisfactory prior weight effects, we derive constraints that are in $3\sigma$ tension with the same oscillation limit. In the absence of unknown systematics, this finding could be interpreted as a hint of new physics not necessarily related to neutrinos. The preference of DESI and CMB data for an evolving dark energy model offers one possible solution. In the $w\_0w\_a$CDM model, we find $\sum m\_\nu<0.163$ eV (95%), resolving the neutrino tension. [Abridged]

2025-03-18, **DESI DR2 Results II: Measurements of Baryon Acoustic Oscillations and Cosmological Constraints**, DESI Collaboration et.al., [2503.14738v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14738v1)

 We present baryon acoustic oscillation (BAO) measurements from more than 14 million galaxies and quasars drawn from the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) Data Release 2 (DR2), based on three years of operation. For cosmology inference, these galaxy measurements are combined with DESI Lyman-$\alpha$ forest BAO results presented in a companion paper. The DR2 BAO results are consistent with DESI DR1 and SDSS, and their distance-redshift relationship matches those from recent compilations of supernovae (SNe) over the same redshift range. The results are well described by a flat $\Lambda$CDM model, but the parameters preferred by BAO are in mild, $2.3\sigma$ tension with those determined from the cosmic microwave background (CMB), although the DESI results are consistent with the acoustic angular scale $\theta\_*$ that is well-measured by Planck. This tension is alleviated by dark energy with a time-evolving equation of state parametrized by $w\_0$ and $w\_a$, which provides a better fit to the data, with a favored solution in the quadrant with $w\_0>-1$ and $w\_a<0$. This solution is preferred over $\Lambda$CDM at $3.1\sigma$ for the combination of DESI BAO and CMB data. When also including SNe, the preference for a dynamical dark energy model over $\Lambda$CDM ranges from $2.8-4.2\sigma$ depending on which SNe sample is used. We present evidence from other data combinations which also favor the same behavior at high significance. From the combination of DESI and CMB we derive 95% upper limits on the sum of neutrino masses, finding $\sum m\_\nu<0.064$ eV assuming $\Lambda$CDM and $\sum m\_\nu<0.16$ eV in the $w\_0w\_a$ model. Unless there is an unknown systematic error associated with one or more datasets, it is clear that $\Lambda$CDM is being challenged by the combination of DESI BAO with other measurements and that dynamical dark energy offers a possible solution.

2025-03-18, **Meson Mixing Bounds on $Z^{\prime}$ Mass in the Alignment Limit: Establishing the Phenomenological Viability of the 331 Model**, Patricio Escalona et.al., [2503.14653v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14653v1)

 We perform a systematic study of flavor-changing neutral currents (FCNCs) in the 331 model with right-handed neutrinos (331RHNs), analyzing constraints on the $Z^\prime$ boson mass from $K$-, $D$-, $B\_d$-, and $B\_s$-meson oscillations. By explicitly incorporating scalar sector dynamics and quark rotation ambiguities ($V\_L^{u,d}$), we demonstrate that $Z^\prime$ mass limits depend critically on the parametrization of Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix factors. Three scenarios are explored: (i) $V\_L^u = V\_\text{CKM}^\dagger$ (FCNCs restricted to $D$-mesons), (ii) $V\_L^d = V\_\text{CKM}$ (dominant $B\_s$ constraints), and (iii) a hybrid mixing pattern. Strikingly, scenario (i) reduces the $Z^\prime$ mass bound to $M\_{Z^\prime} \gtrsim 600\;\text{GeV}$-two orders of magnitude below literature values-by leveraging large experimental uncertainties in $D$-$\bar{D}$ oscillations. Conversely, scenario (ii) requires $M\_{Z^\prime} \gtrsim 165\;\text{TeV}$ due to stringent $B\_s$ data. We further establish the alignment limit $\cos(\phi+\varphi) = 0$ for the SM-like Higgs, showing its viability depends on $V\_L^{u,d}$ configurations, with $B\_s$ systems enforcing $\|\cos(\phi+\varphi)\| < 0.01$ in down-sector FCNC scenarios. Our analysis reveals that strategic choices of quark mixing matrices can suppress FCNC visibility, reconciling the 331 framework with flavor data without ultra-heavy $Z^\prime$ bosons. This work provides the first unified treatment of SM-like Higgs- and $Z^\prime$-mediated FCNCs in 331 models, identifying viable parameter spaces for collider phenomenology.

2025-03-18, **On the Origin of the Very-High-Energy Diffuse $γ$-Ray Emission: The Case for Galactic Source Cocoons**, Antonio Ambrosone et.al., [2503.14651v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14651v1)

 The secondary/primary cosmic-ray ratios and the diffuse backgrounds of gamma rays and neutrinos provide us with complementary information about the transport of Galactic cosmic rays. We use the recent measurement of the diffuse gamma ray background in the $\sim \rm TeV -\rm PeV$ range by LHAASO and of the very high energy diffuse neutrino background from the Galactic disc by IceCube to show that CRs may be accumulating an approximately energy independent grammage $X\sim 0.4\, \rm g \, \rm cm^{-2}$, in regions where gamma rays and neutrinos are produced with a hard spectrum, resembling the source spectrum. We speculate that this grammage reflects the early stages of cosmic ray transport around sources, in so-called cocoons, where particles spend $\sim 0.3\, \rm Myr$ before starting their journey in the Galactic environment.

2025-03-18, **Modular $S_{3}$ flavoured Pati-Salam model with two family seesaw**, A. E. Cárcamo Hernández et.al., [2503.14610v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14610v1)

 We present a unified model of quarks and leptons with modular $S\_3$ flavour symmetry, where the two lightest family masses are naturally suppressed via a Pati-Salam version of the type I seesaw mechanism, mediated through heavier vector-like fermions. Majorana neutrino masses are further suppressed through a double seesaw mechanism. The viable parameter space has a preferred range of the modulus field with Im$(\tau) \sim 2 $, leading to successful fermion masses and mixing.   The prediction for neutrinoless double beta decay is partly within the reach of the nEXO experiment. In particular, the Dirac CP violating neutrino oscillation phase is predicted to lie in the range   $\delta\_{\rm CP}^{\nu}\sim 260^o-360^o$.

2025-03-18, **Association of 220 PeV Neutrino KM3-230213A with Gamma-Ray Bursts**, Ruiqi Wang et.al., [2503.14471v2](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14471v2)

 Recently, the KM3NeT Collaboration released the detection of a 220 PeV neutrino from the celestial coordinates RA=94.3\degree~ and Dec=-7.8\degree~ on 13 February 2023 at 01:16:47 UTC \cite{KM3NeT:2025npi}. The source for this extra-ordinary cosmic neutrino, designated KM3-230213A, is not identified yet but there has been a speculation that it might be associated with a gamma-ray burst GRB~090401B \cite{Amelino-Camelia:2025lqn}. The purpose of this report is to search the association of this 220 PeV neutrino with potential GRB sources from a more general consideration of Lorentz invariance violation (LV) without fixed LV scale. We try to associate this extra-ordinary neutrino with potential GRBs within angular separation of 1\degree, 3\degree~ and 5\degree~ respectively and the results are listed in Table 1. We find the constraints $E\_{\rm{LV}}\leq 5.3\times 10^{18}$~GeV for subluminal LV violation and $E\_{\rm{LV}}\leq 5.6\times 10^{19}$~GeV for superluminal LV violation if KM3-230213A is a GRB neutrino.

2025-03-18, **What's the matter with $Σm_ν$?**, Gabriel P. Lynch et.al., [2503.14470v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14470v1)

 Due to non-zero neutrino rest masses we expect the energy density today in non-relativistic matter, $\omega\_{\rm m}$, to be greater than the sum of baryon and cold dark matter densities, $\omega\_{\rm cb}$. We also expect the amplitude of deflections of CMB photons due to gravitational lensing to be suppressed relative to expectations assuming massless neutrinos. The combination of CMB and BAO data, however, appear to be defying both of these expectations. Here we review how the neutrino rest mass is determined from cosmological observations, and emphasize the complementary roles played by BAO and lensing data in this process. We explain why, for current constraints on the sum of neutrino masses, the addition of BAO data to primary CMB data is much more informative than the addition of CMB lensing reconstruction data. We then use a phenomenological model to find that the preference from CMB and BAO data for a matter density that is below expectations from the CMB alone is at the $3\, \sigma$ level. We also show that if a fraction of the dark matter decays to dark radiation, the preference for $\omega\_{\rm m} > \omega\_{\rm cb}$ can be restored, but with a small increase to the CMB lensing excess.

2025-03-18, **Origin of holes and rings in the Green Monster of Cassiopeia A: Insights from 3D magnetohydrodynamic simulations**, S. Orlando et.al., [2503.14455v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14455v1)

 [Abridged] Cassiopeia A (Cas A) provides a unique opportunity to study supernova (SN) dynamics and interactions with the circumstellar medium (CSM). Recent JWST observations revealed the "Green Monster" (GM), a structure with a likely CSM origin. We investigate its pockmarked morphology, characterized by circular holes and rings, by examining the role of small-scale ejecta structures interacting with a dense circumstellar shell. We adopted a neutrino-driven SN model to trace the evolution of its explosion from core collapse to the age of the Cas A remnant using high-resolution 3D magnetohydrodynamic simulations. Besides other processes, the simulations include self-consistent calculations of radiative losses, accounting for deviations from electron-proton temperature equilibration and ionization equilibrium, as well as the ejecta composition derived from the SN. The GM's morphology is reproduced by dense ejecta clumps and fingers interacting with an asymmetric, forward-shocked circumstellar shell. The clumps and fingers form by hydrodynamic instabilities growing at the interface between SN ejecta and shocked CSM. Radiative cooling accounting for effects of non-equilibrium of ionization enhances the ejecta fragmentation, forming dense knots and thin filamentary structures that penetrate the shell, producing a network of holes and rings with properties similar to those observed. The origin of the holes and rings in the GM can be attributed to the interaction of ejecta with a shocked circumstellar shell. By constraining the timing of this interaction and analyzing the properties of these structures, we provide a distinction of this scenario from an alternative hypothesis, which attributes these features to fast-moving ejecta knots penetrating the shell ahead of the forward shock.

2025-03-18, **The Atacama Cosmology Telescope: DR6 Constraints on Extended Cosmological Models**, Erminia Calabrese et.al., [2503.14454v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14454v1)

 We use new cosmic microwave background (CMB) primary temperature and polarization anisotropy measurements from the Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT) Data Release 6 (DR6) to test foundational assumptions of the standard cosmological model and set constraints on extensions to it. We derive constraints from the ACT DR6 power spectra alone, as well as in combination with legacy data from Planck. To break geometric degeneracies, we include ACT and Planck CMB lensing data and baryon acoustic oscillation data from DESI Year-1, and further add supernovae measurements from Pantheon+ for models that affect the late-time expansion history. We verify the near-scale-invariance (running of the spectral index $d n\_s/d\ln k = 0.0062 \pm 0.0052$) and adiabaticity of the primordial perturbations. Neutrino properties are consistent with Standard Model predictions: we find no evidence for new light, relativistic species that are free-streaming ($N\_{\rm eff} = 2.86 \pm 0.13$, which combined with external BBN data becomes $N\_{\rm eff} = 2.89 \pm 0.11$), for non-zero neutrino masses ($\sum m\_\nu < 0.082$ eV at 95% CL), or for neutrino self-interactions. We also find no evidence for self-interacting dark radiation ($N\_{\rm idr} < 0.134$), early-universe variation of fundamental constants, early dark energy, primordial magnetic fields, or modified recombination. Our data are consistent with standard BBN, the FIRAS-inferred CMB temperature, a dark matter component that is collisionless and with only a small fraction allowed as axion-like particles, a cosmological constant, and the late-time growth rate predicted by general relativity. We find no statistically significant preference for a departure from the baseline $\Lambda$CDM model. In general, models introduced to increase the Hubble constant or to decrease the amplitude of density fluctuations inferred from the primary CMB are not favored by our data.

2025-03-18, **Neutron portal to ultra-high-energy neutrinos**, Gustavo F. S. Alves et.al., [2503.14419v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14419v1)

 Current data on ultra-high-energy (UHE) cosmic rays suggest they are predominantly made of heavy nuclei. This indicates that the flux of neutrinos produced from proton collisions on the cosmic microwave background is small and hard to observe. Motivated by the recent extremely-high-energy muon event reported by KM3NeT, we explore the possibility of enhancing the energy-flux of cosmogenic neutrinos through nuclear photodisintegration in the presence of new physics. Specifically, we speculate that UHE neutrons may oscillate into a new state, dark (or mirror) neutron $n'$ that in turn decays injecting large amount of energy to neutrinos, $n\to n'\to \nu\_\text{UHE}$. While this mechanism does not explain the tension between the KM3NeT event and null results from IceCube, it reconciles the experimental preference for a heavier cosmic ray composition with a large diffuse cosmogenic flux of UHE neutrinos.

2025-03-18, **Pseudo-Goldstone Dark Matter from Primordial Black Holes: Gravitational Wave Signatures and Implications for KM3-230213A Event at KM3NeT**, Siyu Jiang et.al., [2503.14332v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14332v1)

 In many well-motivated new physics models, the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone boson (pNGB) from U(1) symmetry breaking emerges as a promising dark matter candidate. Its coupling, suppressed by the symmetry breaking scale, prevents thermal equilibrium in the early Universe for high scale symmetry breaking. Thus, pNGB dark matter is predominantly produced via non-thermal mechanisms, such as the freeze-in process through a new portal coupling. In this work, we explore a novel mechanism for the production of pNGB dark matter even with feeble Higgs portal coupling-arising from Hawking radiation or superradiance of primordial black holes. We systematically investigate the production of light and heavy pNGB dark matter, both for Schwarzschild and Kerr black holes. We also discuss its potential gravitational wave signatures from domain wall collapse, density perturbations, and Hawking radiation. If the ultraviolet (UV) model is considered, the recent $\mathcal{O}$(100) PeV neutrino event KM3-230213A at KM3NeT can be naturally explained.

2025-03-18, **Core-collapse supernova explosions hindered by eV-mass sterile neutrinos**, Kanji Mori et.al., [2503.14027v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14027v1)

 Light sterile neutrinos, $\nu\_s$, are often introduced to explain an anomalous deficit in the electron antineutrino flux from nuclear reactors. If they exist, sterile neutrinos would also be produced in collapsing massive stars through the active-sterile neutrino oscillation. In order to investigate the impacts of sterile neutrinos on supernova dynamics, we perform two-dimensional neutrino-radiation hydrodynamic simulations of stellar core-collapse coupled with the active-sterile oscillation. As the initial condition of our simulations, we adopt a blue supergiant model that is tuned to reproduce observational features of the SN 1987A progenitor to compare our models with observations of the event. It is found that the active-sterile oscillation reduces the $\nu\_{e}$ and $\bar{\nu}\_e$ fluxes and decreases the explosion energy. We also find that, if the mixing angle $\theta$ and the mass difference $\delta m\_\mathrm{s}^2$ between $\nu\_e$ and $\nu\_s$ are large enough, the star fails to explode. This suggests that these mixing parameters relevant to sterile neutrinos could be constrained by supernova explodability, though other uncertainties in supernova theory need to be addressed to refine them. In addition, we predict neutrino signals from a nearby supernova event and find that the neutrino event number can significantly decrease because the $\nu\_e$ and $\bar{\nu}\_e$ fluxes are reduced. In particular, DUNE observations of $\nu\_e$ will be useful to search for a signature of sterile neutrinos with a tiny mixing angle because a smaller mixing angle leads to a larger effect on the $\nu\_e$ flux.

2025-03-18, **Characterizing Beam Profiles in Accelerator Neutrino Experiments through Off-Axis Neutrino Interactions**, Svetlana Karpova et.al., [2503.13997v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.13997v1)

 We introduce a novel approach that utilizes neutrino events from the off-axis near detector to investigate the beam profile in long-baseline neutrino experiments. Understanding the dynamics of the neutrino beam is crucial for improving the precision of neutrino oscillation measurements. We demonstrate that certain observables related to the azimuthal angle of the neutrino direction are useful for determining the average neutrino production point from experimental data, providing a valuable cross-check against Monte Carlo simulations. Additionally, these observables can help identify potential alignment issues between the detector and the decay volume. In future neutrino experiments with significantly higher statistics, these observables will become essential to ensure the accuracy and stability of the beam profile.

# dark matter (44)

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). Galaxy shapes and alignments in the cosmic web**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15333v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15333v1)

 Galaxy morphologies and shape orientations are expected to correlate with their large-scale environment, since they grow by accreting matter from the cosmic web and are subject to interactions with other galaxies. Cosmic filaments are extracted in projection from the Euclid Quick Data Release 1 (covering 63.1 $\mathrm{deg}^2$) at $0.5<z<0.9$ in tomographic slices of 170 comoving $h^{-1}\mathrm{Mpc}$ using photometric redshifts. Galaxy morphologies are accurately retrieved thanks to the excellent resolution of VIS data. The distribution of massive galaxies ($M\_* > 10^{10} M\_\odot$) in the projected cosmic web is analysed as a function of morphology measured from VIS data. Specifically, the 2D alignment of galaxy shapes with large-scale filaments is quantified as a function of S\'ersic indices and masses. We find the known trend that more massive galaxies are closer to filament spines. At fixed stellar masses, morphologies correlate both with densities and distances to large-scale filaments. In addition, the large volume of this data set allows us to detect a signal indicating that there is a preferential alignment of the major axis of massive early-type galaxies along projected cosmic filaments. Overall, these results demonstrate our capabilities to carry out detailed studies of galaxy environments with Euclid, which will be extended to higher redshift and lower stellar masses with the future Euclid Deep Survey.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). The role of cosmic connectivity in shaping galaxy clusters**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15332v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15332v1)

 The matter distribution around galaxy clusters is distributed over several filaments, reflecting their positions as nodes in the large-scale cosmic web. The number of filaments connected to a cluster, namely its connectivity, is expected to affect the physical properties of clusters. Using the first Euclid galaxy catalogue from the Euclid Quick Release 1 (Q1), we investigate the connectivity of galaxy clusters and how it correlates with their physical and galaxy member properties. Around 220 clusters located within the three fields of Q1 (covering $\sim 63 \ \text{deg}^2$), are analysed in the redshift range $0.2 < z < 0.7$. Due to the photometric redshift uncertainty, we reconstruct the cosmic web skeleton, and measure cluster connectivity, in 2-D projected slices with a thickness of 170 comoving $h^{-1}.\text{Mpc}$ and centred on each cluster redshift, by using two different filament finder algorithms on the most massive galaxies ($M\_*\ > 10^{10.3} \ M\_\odot$). In agreement with previous measurements, we recover the mass-connectivity relation independently of the filament detection algorithm, showing that the most massive clusters are, on average, connected to a larger number of cosmic filaments, consistent with hierarchical structure formation models. Furthermore, we explore possible correlations between connectivities and two cluster properties: the fraction of early-type galaxies and the S\'ersic index of galaxy members. Our result suggests that the clusters populated by early-type galaxies exhibit higher connectivity compared to clusters dominated by late-type galaxies. These preliminary investigations highlight our ability to quantify the impact of the cosmic web connectivity on cluster properties with Euclid.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). The first catalogue of strong-lensing galaxy clusters**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15330v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15330v1)

 We present the first catalogue of strong lensing galaxy clusters identified in the Euclid Quick Release 1 observations (covering $63.1\,\mathrm{deg^2}$). This catalogue is the result of the visual inspection of 1260 cluster fields. Each galaxy cluster was ranked with a probability, $\mathcal{P}\_{\mathrm{lens}}$, based on the number and plausibility of the identified strong lensing features. Specifically, we identified 83 gravitational lenses with $\mathcal{P}\_{\mathrm{lens}}>0.5$, of which 14 have $\mathcal{P}\_{\mathrm{lens}}=1$, and clearly exhibiting secure strong lensing features, such as giant tangential and radial arcs, and multiple images. Considering the measured number density of lensing galaxy clusters, approximately $0.3\,\mathrm{deg}^{-2}$ for $\mathcal{P}\_{\mathrm{lens}}>0.9$, we predict that \Euclid\ will likely see more than 4500 strong lensing clusters over the course of the mission. Notably, only three of the identified cluster-scale lenses had been previously observed from space. Thus, \Euclid has provided the first high-resolution imaging for the remaining $80$ galaxy cluster lenses, including those with the highest probability. The identified strong lensing features will be used for training deep-learning models for identifying gravitational arcs and multiple images automatically in \Euclid observations. This study confirms the huge potential of \Euclid for finding new strong lensing clusters, enabling exciting new discoveries on the nature of dark matter and dark energy and the study of the high-redshift Universe.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). LEMON -- Lens Modelling with Neural networks. Automated and fast modelling of Euclid gravitational lenses with a singular isothermal ellipsoid mass profile**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15329v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15329v1)

 The Euclid mission aims to survey around 14000 deg^{2} of extragalactic sky, providing around 10^{5} gravitational lens images. Modelling of gravitational lenses is fundamental to estimate the total mass of the lens galaxy, along with its dark matter content. Traditional modelling of gravitational lenses is computationally intensive and requires manual input. In this paper, we use a Bayesian neural network, LEns MOdelling with Neural networks (LEMON), for modelling Euclid gravitational lenses with a singular isothermal ellipsoid mass profile. Our method estimates key lens mass profile parameters, such as the Einstein radius, while also predicting the light parameters of foreground galaxies and their uncertainties. We validate LEMON's performance on both mock Euclid data sets, real Euclidised lenses observed with Hubble Space Telescope (hereafter HST), and real Euclid lenses found in the Perseus ERO field, demonstrating the ability of LEMON to predict parameters of both simulated and real lenses. Results show promising accuracy and reliability in predicting the Einstein radius, axis ratio, position angle, effective radius, S\'ersic index, and lens magnitude for simulated lens galaxies. The application to real data, including the latest Quick Release 1 strong lens candidates, provides encouraging results, particularly for the Einstein radius. We also verified that LEMON has the potential to accelerate traditional modelling methods, by giving to the classical optimiser the LEMON predictions as starting points, resulting in a speed-up of up to 26 times the original time needed to model a sample of gravitational lenses, a result that would be impossible with randomly initialised guesses. This work represents a significant step towards efficient, automated gravitational lens modelling, which is crucial for handling the large data volumes expected from Euclid.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). The Strong Lensing Discovery Engine E - Ensemble classification of strong gravitational lenses: lessons for Data Release 1**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15328v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15328v1)

 The Euclid Wide Survey (EWS) is expected to identify of order $100\,000$ galaxy-galaxy strong lenses across $14\,000$deg$^2$. The Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1) of $63.1$deg$^2$ Euclid images provides an excellent opportunity to test our lens-finding ability, and to verify the anticipated lens frequency in the EWS. Following the Q1 data release, eight machine learning networks from five teams were applied to approximately one million images. This was followed by a citizen science inspection of a subset of around $100\,000$ images, of which $65\%$ received high network scores, with the remainder randomly selected. The top scoring outputs were inspected by experts to establish confident (grade A), likely (grade B), possible (grade C), and unlikely lenses. In this paper we combine the citizen science and machine learning classifiers into an ensemble, demonstrating that a combined approach can produce a purer and more complete sample than the original individual classifiers. Using the expert-graded subset as ground truth, we find that this ensemble can provide a purity of $52\pm2\%$ (grade A/B lenses) with $50\%$ completeness (for context, due to the rarity of lenses a random classifier would have a purity of $0.05\%$). We discuss future lessons for the first major Euclid data release (DR1), where the big-data challenges will become more significant and will require analysing more than $\sim300$ million galaxies, and thus time investment of both experts and citizens must be carefully managed.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). The Strong Lensing Discovery Engine D -- Double-source-plane lens candidates**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15327v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15327v1)

 Strong gravitational lensing systems with multiple source planes are powerful tools for probing the density profiles and dark matter substructure of the galaxies. The ratio of Einstein radii is related to the dark energy equation of state through the cosmological scaling factor $\beta$. However, galaxy-scale double-source-plane lenses (DSPLs) are extremely rare. In this paper, we report the discovery of four new galaxy-scale double-source-plane lens candidates in the Euclid Quick Release 1 (Q1) data. These systems were initially identified through a combination of machine learning lens-finding models and subsequent visual inspection from citizens and experts. We apply the widely-used {\tt LensPop} lens forecasting model to predict that the full \Euclid survey will discover 1700 DSPLs, which scales to $6 \pm 3$ DSPLs in 63 deg$^2$, the area of Q1. The number of discoveries in this work is broadly consistent with this forecast. We present lens models for each DSPL and infer their $\beta$ values. Our initial Q1 sample demonstrates the promise of \Euclid to discover such rare objects.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). The Strong Lensing Discovery Engine C -- Finding lenses with machine learning**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15326v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15326v1)

 Strong gravitational lensing has the potential to provide a powerful probe of astrophysics and cosmology, but fewer than 1000 strong lenses have been confirmed previously. With \ang{;;0.16} resolution covering a third of the sky, the \Euclid telescope will revolutionise strong lens finding, with \num{170000} lenses forecasted to be discovered amongst its 1.5 billion galaxies. We present an analysis of the performance of five machine-learning models at finding strong gravitational lenses in the quick release of \Euclid data (Q1), covering 63\,deg$^{2}$. The models are validated with citizen scientists and expert visual inspection. We focus on the best performing network: a fine-tuned version of the \texttt{Zoobot} pretrained model, originally trained to classify galaxy morphologies in heterogeneous astronomical imaging surveys. Of the one million Q1 objects that \texttt{Zoobot} was tasked to find strong lenses within, the top 1000 ranked objects contained 122 grade A lenses (almost certain lenses), and 41 grade B lenses (probable lenses). A deeper search with the five networks combined with visual inspection discovered 250 (247) grade A (B) lenses, of which 224 (182) are ranked in the top \num{20000} by \texttt{Zoobot}. When extrapolated to the full \Euclid survey, the highest ranked one million images will contain \num{75000} grade A or B strong gravitational lenses.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1) The Strong Lensing Discovery Engine B -- Early strong lens candidates from visual inspection of high velocity dispersion galaxies**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15325v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15325v1)

 We present a search for strong gravitational lenses in \Euclid imaging with high stellar velocity dispersion ($\sigmav>180\,\kms$) reported by SDSS and DESI. We performed expert visual inspection and classification of $11\,660$ \Euclid images. We discovered 38 grade A and 40 grade B candidate lenses, consistent with an expected sample of $\sim$32. Palomar spectroscopy confirmed 5 lens systems, while DESI spectra confirmed one, provided ambiguous results for another, and help to discard one. The \Euclid automated lens modeler modelled 53 candidates, confirming 38 as lenses, failing to model 9, and ruling out 6 grade B candidates. For the remaining 25 candidates we could not gather additional information. More importantly, our expert-classified non-lenses provide an excellent training set for machine learning lens classifiers. We create high-fidelity simulations of \Euclid lenses by painting realistic lensed sources behind the expert tagged (non-lens) luminous red galaxies. This training set is the foundation stone for the \Euclid galaxy-galaxy strong lensing discovery engine.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1): The Strong Lensing Discovery Engine A -- System overview and lens catalogue**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15324v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15324v1)

 We present a catalogue of 497 galaxy-galaxy strong lenses in the Euclid Quick Release 1 data (63 deg$^2$). In the initial 0.45\% of Euclid's surveys, we double the total number of known lens candidates with space-based imaging. Our catalogue includes 250 grade A candidates, the vast majority of which (243) were previously unpublished. Euclid's resolution reveals rare lens configurations of scientific value including double-source-plane lenses, edge-on lenses, complete Einstein rings, and quadruply-imaged lenses. We resolve lenses with small Einstein radii ($\theta\_{\rm E} < \ang{;;1}$) in large numbers for the first time. These lenses are found through an initial sweep by deep learning models, followed by Space Warps citizen scientist inspection, expert vetting, and system-by-system modelling. Our search approach scales straightforwardly to Euclid Data Release 1 and, without changes, would yield approximately 7000 high-confidence (grade A or B) lens candidates by late 2026. Further extrapolating to the complete Euclid Wide Survey implies a likely yield of over 100000 high-confidence candidates, transforming strong lensing science.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). Extending the quest for little red dots to z<4**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15323v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15323v1)

 Recent James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) observations have revealed a population of sources with a compact morphology and a `v-shaped' continuum, namely blue at rest-frame $\lambda<4000$A and red at longer wavelengths. The nature of these sources, called `little red dots' (LRDs), is still debated, since it is unclear if they host active galactic nuclei (AGN) and their number seems to drastically drop at z<4. We utilise the 63 $deg^2$ covered by the quick Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1) to extend the search for LRDs to brighter magnitudes and to lower z than what has been possible with JWST to have a broader view of the evolution of this peculiar galaxy population. The selection is done by fitting the available photometric data (Euclid, Spitzer/IRAC, and ground-based griz data) with two power laws, to retrieve the rest-frame optical and UV slopes consistently over a large redshift range (i.e, z<7.6). We exclude extended objects and possible line emitters, and perform a visual inspection to remove imaging artefacts. The final selection includes 3341 LRD candidates from z=0.33 to z=3.6, with 29 detected in IRAC. Their rest-frame UV luminosity function, in contrast with previous JWST studies, shows that the number density of LRD candidates increases from high-z down to z=1.5-2.5 and decreases at even lower z. Less evolution is apparent focusing on the subsample of more robust LRD candidates having IRAC detections, which is affected by low statistics and limited by the IRAC resolution. The comparison with previous quasar UV luminosity functions shows that LRDs are not the dominant AGN population at z<4. Follow-up studies of these LRD candidates are key to confirm their nature, probe their physical properties and check for their compatibility with JWST sources, since the different spatial resolution and wavelength coverage of Euclid and JWST could select different samples of compact sources.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). An investigation of optically faint, red objects in the Euclid Deep Fields**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15322v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15322v1)

 Our understanding of cosmic star-formation at $z>3$ used to largely rely on rest-frame UV observations. However, these observations overlook dusty and massive sources, resulting in an incomplete census of early star-forming galaxies. Recently, infrared data from Spitzer and the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) have revealed a hidden population at $z\sim$3-6 with extreme red colours. Taking advantage of the overlap between imaging in the Euclid Deep Fields (EDFs), covering $\sim$ 60 deg$^2$, and ancillary Spitzer observations, we identified 27000 extremely red objects with $H\_E-$IRAC2>2.25 (dubbed HIEROs) down to a $10\sigma$ completeness magnitude limit of IRAC2 $=$ 22.5 AB. After a visual inspection to discard artefacts and objects with troubling photometry, we ended up with a final sample of 3900 candidates. We retrieved the physical parameter estimates for these objects from the SED-fitting tool CIGALE. Our results confirm that HIERO galaxies may populate the high-mass end of the stellar mass function at $z>3$, with some reaching extreme stellar masses ($M\_*>10^{11}M\_\odot$) and exhibiting high dust attenuation ($A\_V>3$). However, we consider stellar mass estimates unreliable for $z>3.5$, favouring a lower-z solution. The challenges faced by SED-fitting tools in characterising these objects highlight the need for further studies, incorporating shorter-wavelength and spectroscopic data. Euclid spectra will help resolve degeneracies and better constrain the physical properties of the brightest galaxies. Given the extreme nature of this population, characterising these sources is crucial for understanding galaxy evolution. This work demonstrates Euclid's potential to provide statistical samples of rare, massive, dust-obscured galaxies at $z>3$, which will be prime targets for JWST, ALMA, and ELT.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). Active galactic nuclei identification using diffusion-based inpainting of Euclid VIS images**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15321v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15321v1)

 Light emission from galaxies exhibit diverse brightness profiles, influenced by factors such as galaxy type, structural features and interactions with other galaxies. Elliptical galaxies feature more uniform light distributions, while spiral and irregular galaxies have complex, varied light profiles due to their structural heterogeneity and star-forming activity. In addition, galaxies with an active galactic nucleus (AGN) feature intense, concentrated emission from gas accretion around supermassive black holes, superimposed on regular galactic light, while quasi-stellar objects (QSO) are the extreme case of the AGN emission dominating the galaxy. The challenge of identifying AGN and QSO has been discussed many times in the literature, often requiring multi-wavelength observations. This paper introduces a novel approach to identify AGN and QSO from a single image. Diffusion models have been recently developed in the machine-learning literature to generate realistic-looking images of everyday objects. Utilising the spatial resolving power of the Euclid VIS images, we created a diffusion model trained on one million sources, without using any source pre-selection or labels. The model learns to reconstruct light distributions of normal galaxies, since the population is dominated by them. We condition the prediction of the central light distribution by masking the central few pixels of each source and reconstruct the light according to the diffusion model. We further use this prediction to identify sources that deviate from this profile by examining the reconstruction error of the few central pixels regenerated in each source's core. Our approach, solely using VIS imaging, features high completeness compared to traditional methods of AGN and QSO selection, including optical, near-infrared, mid-infrared, and X-rays. [abridged]

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). The active galaxies of Euclid**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15320v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15320v1)

 We present a catalogue of candidate active galactic nuclei (AGN) in the $Euclid$ Quick Release (Q1) fields. For each $Euclid$ source we collect multi-wavelength photometry and spectroscopy information from Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX), $Gaia$, Dark Energy Survey (DES), Wise-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE), $Spitzer$, Dark Energy Survey (DESI), and Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), including spectroscopic redshift from public compilations. We investigate the AGN contents of the Q1 fields by applying selection criteria using $Euclid$ colours and WISE-AllWISE cuts finding respectively 292,222 and 65,131 candidates. We also create a high-purity QSO catalogue based on $Gaia$ DR3 information containing 1971 candidates. Furthermore, we utilise the collected spectroscopic information from DESI to perform broad-line and narrow-line AGN selections, leading to a total of 4392 AGN candidates in the Q1 field. We investigate and refine the Q1 probabilistic random forest QSO population, selecting a total of 180,666 candidates. Additionally, we perform SED fitting on a subset of sources with available $z\_{\text{spec}}$, and by utilizing the derived AGN fraction, we identify a total of 7766 AGN candidates. We discuss purity and completeness of the selections and define two new colour selection criteria ($JH$\_$I\_{\text{E}}Y$ and $I\_{\text{E}}H$\_$gz$) to improve on purity, finding 313,714 and 267,513 candidates respectively in the Q1 data. We find a total of 229,779 AGN candidates equivalent to an AGN surface density of 3641 deg$^{-2}$ for $18<I\_{\text{E}}\leq 24.5$, and a subsample of 30,422 candidates corresponding to an AGN surface density of 482 deg$^{-2}$ when limiting the depth to $18<I\_{\text{E}}\leq 22$. The surface density of AGN recovered from this work is in line with predictions based on the AGN X-ray luminosity functions.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1) First study of red quasars selection**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15319v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15319v1)

 Red quasars constitute an important but elusive phase in the evolution of supermassive black holes, where dust obscuration can significantly alter their observed properties. They have broad emission lines, like other quasars, but their optical continuum emission is significantly reddened, which is why they were traditionally identified based on near- and mid-infrared selection criteria. This work showcases the capability of the \Euclid space telescope to find a large sample of red quasars, using \Euclid near infrared (NIR) photometry. We first conduct a forecast analysis, comparing a synthetic catalogue of red QSOs with COSMOS2020. Using template fitting, we reconstruct \Euclid-like photometry for the COSMOS sources and identify a sample of candidates in a multidimensional colour-colour space achieving $98\%$ completeness for mock red QSOs with $30\%$ contaminants. To refine our selection function, we implement a probabilistic Random Forest classifier, and use UMAP visualisation to disentangle non-linear features in colour-space, reaching $98\%$ completeness and $88\%$ purity. A preliminary analysis of the candidates in the \Euclid Deep Field Fornax (EDF-F) shows that, compared to VISTA+DECAm-based colour selection criteria, \Euclid's superior depth, resolution and optical-to-NIR coverage improves the identification of the reddest, most obscured sources. Notably, the \Euclid exquisite resolution in the $I\_E$ filter unveils the presence of a candidate dual quasar system, highlighting the potential for this mission to contribute to future studies on the population of dual AGN. The resulting catalogue of candidates, including more the 150 000 sources, provides a first census of red quasars in \Euclid Q1 and sets the groundwork for future studies in the Euclid Wide Survey (EWS), including spectral follow-up analyses and host morphology characterisation.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). First Euclid statistical study of the active galactic nuclei contribution fraction**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15318v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15318v1)

 Active galactic nuclei (AGN) play a key role in galaxy evolution but are challenging to identify due to their varied observational signatures. Furthermore, understanding their impact requires quantifying their strength relative to their host galaxies. We developed a deep learning (DL) model for identifying AGN in imaging data by deriving the contribution of the central point source. Trained on Euclidised mock galaxy images with injected AGN levels, in the form of varying contributions of the point-spread function (PSF), our model can precisely and accurately recover the injected AGN contribution fraction $f\_{\rm PSF}$, with a mean difference between the predicted and true $f\_{\rm PSF}$ of $-0.0078$ and an overall root mean square error (RMSE) of 0.051. This method moves beyond binary AGN classification, enabling precise AGN contribution measurements. Applying our model to a stellar-mass-limited sample ($M\_{\ast} \ge 10^{9.8} M\_{\odot}$, $0.5 \le z \le 2.0$) from the first \Euclid quick data release (Q1), we identify $48,840 \pm 78$ AGN over 63.1 deg$^2$ ($7.8\pm0.1$%) using a threshold of $f\_{\rm PSF} > 0.2$. We compare our DL-selected AGN with those identified in X-ray, mid-infrared (MIR), and optical spectroscopy and investigate their overlapping fractions depending on different thresholds on the PSF contribution. We find that the overlap increases with increasing X-ray or bolometric AGN luminosity. The AGN luminosity in the $I\_{\rm E}$ filter correlates with host galaxy stellar mass, suggesting faster supermassive black hole (SMBH) growth in more massive galaxies. Moreover, the mean relative contribution of the AGN is higher in quiescent galaxies than in star-forming ones. Starburst galaxies and the most massive galaxies (across the star-formation main sequence) tend to host the most luminous AGN, indicating concomitant assembly of the SMBH and the host galaxy.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1) -- First Euclid statistical study of galaxy mergers and their connection to active galactic nuclei**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15317v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15317v1)

 Galaxy major mergers are a key pathway to trigger AGN. We present the first detection of major mergers in the Euclid Deep Fields and analyse their connection with AGN. We constructed a stellar-mass-complete ($M\_*>10^{9.8}\,M\_{\odot}$) sample of galaxies from the first quick data release (Q1), in the redshift range z=0.5-2. We selected AGN using X-ray data, optical spectroscopy, mid-infrared colours, and processing \IE observations with an image decomposition algorithm. We used CNNs trained on cosmological simulations to classify galaxies as mergers and non-mergers. We found a larger fraction of AGN in mergers compared to the non-merger controls for all AGN selections, with AGN excess factors ranging from 2 to 6. Likewise, a generally larger merger fraction ($f\_{merg}$) is seen in active galaxies than in the non-active controls. We analysed $f\_{merg}$ as a function of the AGN bolometric luminosity ($L\_{bol}$) and the contribution of the point-source to the total galaxy light in the \IE-band ($f\_{PSF}$) as a proxy for the relative AGN contribution fraction. We uncovered a rising $f\_{merg}$, with increasing $f\_{PSF}$ up to $f\_{PSF}=0.55$, after which we observed a decreasing trend. We then derived the point-source luminosity ($L\_{PSF}$) and showed that $f\_{merg}$ monotonically increases as a function of $L\_{PSF}$ at z<0.9, with $f\_{merg}>$50% for $L\_{PSF}>2\,10^{43}$ erg/s. At z>0.9, $f\_{merg}$ rises as a function of $L\_{PSF}$, though mergers do not dominate until $L\_{PSF}=10^{45}$ erg/s. For X-ray and spectroscopic AGN, we computed $L\_{bol}$, which has a positive correlation with $f\_{merg}$ for X-ray AGN, while shows a less pronounced trend for spectroscopic AGN due to the smaller sample size. At $L\_{bol}>10^{45}$ erg/s, AGN mostly reside in mergers. We concluded that mergers are strongly linked to the most powerful, dust-obscured AGN, associated with rapid supermassive black hole growth.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). Optical and near-infrared identification and classification of point-like X-ray selected sources**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15316v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15316v1)

 To better understand the role of active galactic nuclei (AGN) in galaxy evolution, it is crucial to achieve a complete and pure AGN census. X-ray surveys are key to this, but identifying their counterparts (CTPs) at other wavelengths remains challenging due to their larger positional uncertainties and limited availability of deeper, uniform ancillary data. Euclid is revolutionising this effort, offering extensive coverage of nearly the entire extragalactic sky, particularly in the near-infrared bands, where AGN are more easily detected. With the first Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1), we identifyed, classifyed, and determined the redshifts of Euclid CTPs to known point-like sources from major X-ray surveys, including XMM-Newton, Chandra, and eROSITA. Using Bayesian statistics, combined with machine learning (ML), we identify the CTPs to 11 286 X-ray sources from the three X-ray telescopes. For the large majority of 10 194 sources, the associations are unique, with the remaining $\sim$ 10% of multi-CTP cases equally split between XMM-Newton and eROSITA. ML is then used to distinguish between Galactic (8%) and extragalactic (92%) sources. We computed photo-zs using deep learning for the 8617 sources detected in the 10th data release of the DESI Legacy Survey, reaching an accuracy and a fraction of outliers of about 5%. Based on their X-ray luminosities, over 99% of CTPs identified as extragalactic are classified as AGN, most of which appear unobscured given their hardness ratios. With this paper, we release our catalogue, which includes identifiers, basic X-ray properties, the details of the associations, and additional features such as Galactic/extragalactic classifications and photometric/spectroscopic redshifts. We also provide probabilities for sub-selecting the sample based on purity and completeness, allowing users to tailor the sample according to their specific needs.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). A probabilistic classification of quenched galaxies**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15315v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15315v1)

 Investigating the drivers of the quenching of star formation in galaxies is key to understanding their evolution. The Euclid mission will provide rich spatial and spectral data from optical to infrared wavelengths for millions of galaxies, enabling precise measurements of their star formation histories. Using the first Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1), we developed a probabilistic classification framework, that combines the average specific star-formation rate ($\rm sSFR\_\tau$) inferred over two timescales ($\tau={10^8,10^9}$ yr), to categorize galaxies as `Ageing' (secularly evolving), `Quenched' (recently halted star formation), or `Retired' (dominated by old stars). We validated this methodology using synthetic observations from the IllustrisTNG simulation. Two classification methods were employed: a probabilistic approach, integrating posterior distributions, and a model-driven method optimizing sample purity and completeness using IllustrisTNG. At $z<0.1$ and $M\_\ast \gtrsim 3\times10^{8}\, M\_\odot$, we obtain Euclid class fractions of 68-72%, 8-17%, and 14-19% for Ageing, Quenched, and Retired populations, respectively, consistent with previous studies. The evolution with redshift shows increasing/decreasing fraction of Ageing/Retired galaxies. The fraction of quenched systems shows a weaker dependence on stellar mass and redshift, varying between 5% and 15%. We analysed the mass-size-metallicity relation for each population. Ageing galaxies generally exhibit disc morphologies and low metallicities. Retired galaxies show compact structures and enhanced chemical enrichment, while Quenched galaxies form an intermediate population, more compact and chemically evolved than Ageing systems. This work demonstrates Euclid's great potential for elucidating the physical nature of the quenching mechanisms that govern galaxy evolution.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). A first view of the star-forming main sequence in the Euclid Deep Fields**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15314v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15314v1)

 The star-forming main sequence (SFMS) is a tight relation observed between stellar masses and star-formation rates (SFR) in a population of galaxies. The relation holds for different redshift, morphological, and environmental domains, and is a key to understanding the underlying relations between a galaxy budget of cold gas and its stellar content. \Euclid Quick Data Release 1 (Q1) gives the opportunity to investigate this fundamental relation in galaxy formation and evolution. We complement the \Euclid release with public IRAC observations of the \Euclid Deep Fields (EDFs), improving the quality of recovered photometric redshifts, stellar masses, and star-formation rates, as shown both from simulations and comparison with available spectroscopic redshifts. From Q1 data alone, we recover more than $\sim 30\,\mathrm{k}$ galaxies with $\log\_{10}(M\_\ast/M\_\odot) > 11$, giving a precise constraint of the SFMS at the high-mass end. We investigated SFMS, in a redshift interval between $0.2$ and $3.0$, comparing our results with the existing literature and fitting them with a parameterisation taking into account the presence of a bending of the relation at the high-mass end, depending on the bending mass $M\_0$. We find good agreement with previous results in terms of $M\_0$ values. We also investigate the distribution of physical (e.g., dust absorption $A\_V$ and formation age) and morphological properties (e.g., S\'ersic index and radius) in the SFR--stellar mass plane, and their relation with the SFMS. These results highlight the potential of \Euclid in studying the fundamental scaling relations that regulate galaxy formation and evolution in anticipation of the forthcoming Data Release 1.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1): The evolution of the passive-density and morphology-density relations between z=0.25 and z=1**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15313v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15313v1)

 The extent to which the environment affects galaxy evolution has been under scrutiny by researchers for decades. With the first data from Euclid, we can begin to study a wide range of environments and their effects as a function of redshift, using 63 sq deg of space-based data. In this paper, we present results from the Euclid Q1 Release, where we measure the passive-density and morphology-density relations at z=0.25--1. We determine if a galaxy is passive using the specific star-formation rate, and we classify the morphologies of galaxies using the S\'ersic index n and the u-r colours. We measure the local environmental density of each galaxy using the Nth-nearest neighbour method. We find that at fixed stellar mass, the quenched fraction increases with increasing density up to z=0.75. This result shows the separability of the effects from the stellar mass and the environment, at least at z<0.75. At z>0.75, we observe weak environmental effects, with most high mass galaxies being quenched independently of environment. Up to z=0.75, the ETG fraction increases with density at fixed stellar mass, meaning the environment also transforms the morphology of the galaxy independently of stellar mass, at low mass. For high mass galaxies, almost all galaxies are early-types, with low impact from the environment. At z>0.75, the morphology depends mostly on stellar mass, with only low-mass galaxies being affected by the environment. Given that the morphology classifications use u-r colours, these are correlated to the star-formation rate, and as such our morphology results should be taken with caution; future morphology classifications should verify these results. To summarise, we identify the passive-density and morphology-density relations at z<0.75, but at z>0.75 the relations are less strong. At z>0.75, the uncertainties are large, and future Euclid data releases are key to confirm these trends.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1) Exploring galaxy properties with a multi-modal foundation model**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15312v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15312v1)

 Modern astronomical surveys, such as the Euclid mission, produce high-dimensional, multi-modal data sets that include imaging and spectroscopic information for millions of galaxies. These data serve as an ideal benchmark for large, pre-trained multi-modal models, which can leverage vast amounts of unlabelled data. In this work, we present the first exploration of Euclid data with AstroPT, an autoregressive multi-modal foundation model trained on approximately 300 000 optical and infrared Euclid images and spectral energy distributions (SEDs) from the first Euclid Quick Data Release. We compare self-supervised pre-training with baseline fully supervised training across several tasks: galaxy morphology classification; redshift estimation; similarity searches; and outlier detection. Our results show that: (a) AstroPT embeddings are highly informative, correlating with morphology and effectively isolating outliers; (b) including infrared data helps to isolate stars, but degrades the identification of edge-on galaxies, which are better captured by optical images; (c) simple fine-tuning of these embeddings for photometric redshift and stellar mass estimation outperforms a fully supervised approach, even when using only 1% of the training labels; and (d) incorporating SED data into AstroPT via a straightforward multi-modal token-chaining method improves photo-z predictions, and allow us to identify potentially more interesting anomalies (such as ringed or interacting galaxies) compared to a model pre-trained solely on imaging data.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1), A first look at the fraction of bars in massive galaxies at $z<1$**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15311v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15311v1)

 Stellar bars are key structures in disc galaxies, driving angular momentum redistribution and influencing processes such as bulge growth and star formation. Quantifying the bar fraction as a function of redshift and stellar mass is therefore important for constraining the physical processes that drive disc formation and evolution across the history of the Universe. Leveraging the unprecedented resolution and survey area of the Euclid Q1 data release combined with the Zoobot deep-learning model trained on citizen-science labels, we identify 7711 barred galaxies with $M\_* \gtrsim 10^{10}M\_\odot$ in a magnitude-selected sample $I\_E < 20.5$ spanning $63.1 deg^2$. We measure a mean bar fraction of $0.2-0.4$, consistent with prior studies. At fixed redshift, massive galaxies exhibit higher bar fractions, while lower-mass systems show a steeper decline with redshift, suggesting earlier disc assembly in massive galaxies. Comparisons with cosmological simulations (e.g., TNG50, Auriga) reveal a broadly consistent bar fraction, but highlight overpredictions for high-mass systems, pointing to potential over-efficiency in central stellar mass build-up in simulations. These findings demonstrate Euclid's transformative potential for galaxy morphology studies and underscore the importance of refining theoretical models to better reproduce observed trends. Future work will explore finer mass bins, environmental correlations, and additional morphological indicators.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1): First visual morphology catalogue**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15310v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15310v1)

 We present a detailed visual morphology catalogue for Euclid's Quick Release 1 (Q1). Our catalogue includes galaxy features such as bars, spiral arms, and ongoing mergers, for the 378000 bright ($\IE < 20.5$) or extended (area $\geq 700\,$pixels) galaxies in Q1. The catalogue was created by finetuning the Zoobot galaxy foundation models on annotations from an intensive one month campaign by Galaxy Zoo volunteers. Our measurements are fully automated and hence fully scaleable. This catalogue is the first 0.4% of the approximately 100 million galaxies where Euclid will ultimately resolve detailed morphology.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). Exploring galaxy morphology across cosmic time through Sersic fits**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15309v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15309v1)

 We present the results of the single-component S\'ersic profile fitting for the magnitude-limited sample of \IE$<23$ galaxies within the 63.1 deg$^2$ area of the Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). The associated morphological catalogue includes two sets of structural parameters fitted using \texttt{SourceXtractor++}: one for VIS \IE images and one for a combination of three NISP images in \YE, \JE and \HE bands. We compare the resulting S\'ersic parameters to other morphological measurements provided in the Q1 data release, and to the equivalent parameters based on higher-resolution \HST imaging. These comparisons confirm the consistency and the reliability of the fits to Q1 data. Our analysis of colour gradients shows that NISP profiles have systematically smaller effective radii ($R\_{\rm e}$) and larger S\'ersic indices ($n$) than in VIS. In addition, we highlight trends in NISP-to-VIS parameter ratios with both magnitude and $n\_{\rm VIS}$. From the 2D bimodality of the $(u-r)$ colour-$\log(n)$ plane, we define a $(u-r)\_{\rm lim}(n)$ that separates early- and late-type galaxies (ETGs and LTGs). We use the two subpopulations to examine the variations of $n$ across well-known scaling relations at $z<1$. ETGs display a steeper size--stellar mass relation than LTGs, indicating a difference in the main drivers of their mass assembly. Similarly, LTGs and ETGs occupy different parts of the stellar mass--star-formation rate plane, with ETGs at higher masses than LTGs, and further down below the Main Sequence of star-forming galaxies. This clear separation highlights the link known between the shutdown of star formation and morphological transformations in the Euclid imaging data set. In conclusion, our analysis demonstrates both the robustness of the S\'ersic fits available in the Q1 morphological catalogue and the wealth of information they provide for studies of galaxy evolution with Euclid.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1) - Characteristics and limitations of the spectroscopic measurements**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15308v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15308v1)

 The SPE processing function (PF) of the \Euclid pipeline is dedicated to the automatic analysis of one-dimensional spectra to determine redshifts, line fluxes, and spectral classifications. The first \Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1) delivers these measurements for all $H\_\mathrm{E}<22.5$ objects identified in the photometric survey. In this paper, we present an overview of the SPE PF algorithm and assess its performance by comparing its results with high-quality spectroscopic redshifts from the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) survey in the Euclid Deep Field North. Our findings highlight remarkable accuracy in successful redshift measurements, with a bias of less than $3 \times 10^{-5}$ in $(z\_{\rm SPE}-z\_{\rm DESI})/(1+z\_{\rm DESI})$ and a high precision of approximately $10^{-3}$. The majority of spectra have only a single spectral feature or none at all. To avoid spurious detections, where noise features are misinterpreted as lines or lines are misidentified, it is therefore essential to apply well-defined criteria on quantities such as the redshift probability or the \ha\ flux and signal-to-noise ratio. Using a well-tuned quality selection, we achieve an 89\% redshift success rate in the target redshift range for cosmology ($0.9<z<1.8$), which is well covered by DESI for $z<1.6$. Outside this range where the \ha\ line is observable, redshift measurements are less reliable, except for sources showing specific spectral features (e.g., two bright lines or strong continuum). Ongoing refinements along the entire chain of PFs are expected to enhance both the redshift measurements and the spectral classification, allowing us to define the large and reliable sample required for cosmological analyses. Overall, the Q1 SPE results are promising, demonstrating encouraging potential for cosmology.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1): From spectrograms to spectra: the SIR spectroscopic Processing Function**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15307v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15307v1)

 The Euclid space mission aims to investigate the nature of dark energy and dark matter by mapping the large-scale structure of the Universe. A key component of Euclid's observational strategy is slitless spectroscopy, conducted using the Near Infrared Spectrometer and Photometer (NISP). This technique enables the acquisition of large-scale spectroscopic data without the need for targeted apertures, allowing precise redshift measurements for millions of galaxies. These data are essential for Euclid's core science objectives, including the study of cosmic acceleration and the evolution of galaxy clustering, as well as enabling many non-cosmological investigations. This study presents the SIR processing function (PF), which is responsible for processing slitless spectroscopic data. The objective is to generate science-grade fully-calibrated one-dimensional spectra, ensuring high-quality spectroscopic data. The processing function relies on a source catalogue generated from photometric data, effectively corrects detector effects, subtracts cross-contaminations, minimizes self-contamination, calibrates wavelength and flux, and produces reliable spectra for later scientific use. The first Quick Data Release (Q1) of Euclid's spectroscopic data provides approximately three million validated spectra for sources observed in the red-grism mode from a selected portion of the Euclid Wide Survey. We find that wavelength accuracy and measured resolving power are within requirements, thanks to the excellent optical quality of the instrument. The SIR PF represents a significant step in processing slitless spectroscopic data for the Euclid mission. As the survey progresses, continued refinements and additional features will enhance its capabilities, supporting high-precision cosmological and astrophysical measurements.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). Photometric redshifts and physical properties of galaxies through the PHZ processing function**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15306v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15306v1)

 The ESA Euclid mission will measure the photometric redshifts of billions of galaxies in order to provide an accurate 3D view of the Universe at optical and near-infrared wavelengths. Photometric redshifts are determined by the PHZ processing function on the basis of the multi-wavelength photometry of Euclid and ground-based observations. In this paper, we describe the PHZ processing used for the Euclid Quick Data Release, the output products, and their validation. The PHZ pipeline is responsible for the following main tasks: source classification into star, galaxy, and QSO classes based on photometric colours; determination of photometric redshifts and of physical properties of galaxies. The classification is able to provide a star sample with a high level of purity, a highly complete galaxy sample, and reliable probabilities of belonging to those classes. The identification of QSOs is more problematic: photometric information seems to be insufficient to accurately separate QSOs from galaxies. The performance of the pipeline in the determination of photometric redshifts has been tested using the COSMOS2020 catalogue and a large sample of spectroscopic redshifts. The results are in line with expectations: the precision of the estimates are compatible with Euclid requirements, while, as expected, a bias correction is needed to achieve the accuracy level required for the cosmological probes. Finally, the pipeline provides reliable estimates of the physical properties of galaxies, in good agreement with findings from the COSMOS2020 catalogue, except for an unrealistically large fraction of very young galaxies with very high specific star-formation rates. The application of appropriate priors is, however, sufficient to obtain reliable physical properties for those problematic objects. We present several areas for improvement for future Euclid data releases.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1). NIR processing and data products**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15304v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15304v1)

 This paper describes the near-infrared processing function (NIR PF) that processes near-infrared images from the Near-Infrared Spectrometer and Photometer (NISP) instrument onboard the Euclid satellite. NIR PF consists of three main components: (i) a common pre-processing stage for both photometric (NIR) and spectroscopic (SIR) data to remove instrumental effects; (ii) astrometric and photometric calibration of NIR data, along with catalogue extraction; and (iii) resampling and stacking. The necessary calibration products are generated using dedicated pipelines that process observations from both the early performance verification (PV) phase in 2023 and the nominal survey operations. After outlining the pipeline's structure and algorithms, we demonstrate its application to Euclid Q1 images. For Q1, we achieve an astrometric accuracy of 9-15 mas, a relative photometric accuracy of 5 mmag, and an absolute flux calibration limited by the 1% uncertainty of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) CALSPEC database. We characterise the point-spread function (PSF) that we find very stable across the focal plane, and we discuss current limitations of NIR PF that will be improved upon for future data releases.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1): VIS processing and data products**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15303v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15303v1)

 This paper describes the VIS Processing Function (VIS PF) of the Euclid ground segment pipeline, which processes and calibrates raw data from the VIS camera. We present the algorithms used in each processing element, along with a description of the on-orbit performance of VIS PF, based on Performance Verification (PV) and Q1 data. We demonstrate that the principal performance metrics (image quality, astrometric accuracy, photometric calibration) are within pre-launch specifications. The image-to-image photometric scatter is less than $0.8\%$, and absolute astrometric accuracy compared to Gaia is $5$ mas Image quality is stable over all Q1 images with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of $0.\!^{\prime\prime}16$. The stacked images (combining four nominal and two short exposures) reach $I\_\mathrm{E} = 25.6$ ($10\sigma$, measured as the variance of $1.\!^{\prime\prime}3$ diameter apertures). We also describe quality control metrics provided with each image, and an appendix provides a detailed description of the provided data products. The excellent quality of these images demonstrates the immense potential of Euclid VIS data for weak lensing. VIS data, covering most of the extragalactic sky, will provide a lasting high-resolution atlas of the Universe.

2025-03-19, **Euclid Quick Data Release (Q1) - Data release overview**, Euclid Collaboration et.al., [2503.15302v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15302v1)

 The first Euclid Quick Data Release, Q1, comprises 63.1 sq deg of the Euclid Deep Fields (EDFs) to nominal wide-survey depth. It encompasses visible and near-infrared space-based imaging and spectroscopic data, ground-based photometry in the u, g, r, i and z bands, as well as corresponding masks. Overall, Q1 contains about 30 million objects in three areas near the ecliptic poles around the EDF-North and EDF-South, as well as the EDF-Fornax field in the constellation of the same name. The purpose of this data release -- and its associated technical papers -- is twofold. First, it is meant to inform the community of the enormous potential of the Euclid survey data, to describe what is contained in these data, and to help prepare expectations for the forthcoming first major data release DR1. Second, it enables a wide range of initial scientific projects with wide-survey Euclid data, ranging from the early Universe to the Solar System. The Q1 data were processed with early versions of the processing pipelines, which already demonstrate good performance, with numerous improvements in implementation compared to pre-launch development. In this paper, we describe the sky areas released in Q1, the observations, a top-level view of the data processing of Euclid and associated external data, the Q1 photometric masks, and how to access the data. We also give an overview of initial scientific results obtained using the Q1 data set by Euclid Consortium scientists, and conclude with important caveats when using the data. As a complementary product, Q1 also contains observations of a star-forming area in Lynd's Dark Nebula 1641 in the Orion~A Cloud, observed for technical purposes during Euclid's performance-verification phase. This is a unique target, of a type not commonly found in Euclid's nominal sky survey.

2025-03-19, **Competitive Accretion and the Baryonic Fraction in Galaxies**, Ian A. Bonnell et.al., [2503.15189v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15189v1)

 The baryonic fraction of galaxies is observed to vary with the mass of its dark matter (DM) halo. Low-mass galaxies have low baryonic fractions which increase to a maximum for masses near $10^{12}\ M\_{\odot}$, and decreases thereafter with increasing galaxy mass. This trend is generally attributed to the action of feedback from star formation at the low end and of active galactic nuclei at the high-mass end. An alternative is that the baryonic fraction is at least partially due to the ability of galaxies to competitively accrete gas in a group or clustered environment. Most galaxies in a group including those of lower masses, orbit the cluster centre at significant speeds and hence their accretion is limited by a Bondi-Hoyle type process, $\dot{M}\_{acc} \propto M\_{DM}^2$. In contrast, the few high-mass galaxies reside in the core of the cluster and accrete in a tidal accretion process, $\dot{M}\_{acc} \propto M\_{DM}^{2/3}$. These two mechanisms result in a baryonic mass fraction that increases as $M\_{DM}$ at low masses and decreases as $M\_{DM}^{-1/3}$ at high masses. This model predicts that lower-mass halos in small-N groups should have higher baryonic fractions relative to those in large clusters.

2025-03-19, **A Novel Quantity for Probing Matter Perturbations Below the Fresnel Scale in Gravitational Lensing of Gravitational Waves**, So Tanaka et.al., [2503.15066v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15066v1)

 Gravitational lensing of gravitational waves provides a powerful probe of the mass density distribution in the universe. Wave optics effects, such as diffraction, make the lensing effect sensitive to the structure around the Fresnel scale, which depends on the gravitational wave frequency and is typically sub-Galactic for realistic observations. Contrary to this common lore, we show that wave optics can, in principle, probe matter perturbations even below the Fresnel scale. This is achieved by introducing a new quantity derived from the amplification factor, which characterizes the lensing effect, and analyzing its correlation function. Our results demonstrate that this quantity defines an effective Fresnel scale: a characteristic scale that can be arbitrarily small, even when observational frequencies are bounded. In practice, the effective Fresnel scale is constrained by the observation time $T$ and is suppressed by a factor of $1/\sqrt{fT}$ relative to the standard Fresnel scale at frequency $f$. Nevertheless, it remains significantly smaller than the conventional Fresnel scale for $fT \gg 1$; for instance, in one-year observations of mHz GWs, the effective Fresnel scale can be as small as 1 pc. This approach opens new avenues for probing the fine-scale structure of the universe and the nature of dark matter.

2025-03-19, **Measurement of the Quantum Efficiency of Electrode Materials for VUV Photons in Liquid Xenon**, Shingo Kazama et.al., [2503.14819v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14819v1)

 Light dark matter searches using ionization signals in dual-phase liquid xenon (LXe) time projection chambers (TPCs) are limited by low-energy ionization backgrounds, including those from the photoelectric effect on the electrodes. To address this, we measured the quantum efficiency (QE) of various electrode materials for vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) photons in LXe, including platinum (Pt), stainless steel (SUS304), and magnesium fluoride (MgF$\_{2}$)-coated aluminum (Al). Our results show that MgF$\_{2}$-coated Al exhibits the lowest QE among the tested materials. The QE for VUV photons with a mean wavelength of 179.5~nm was measured to be $(7.2 \pm 2.3) \times 10^{-5}$, corresponding to a reduction by a factor of 4.4 compared to SUS304, a commonly used electrode material in direct dark matter experiments with LXe. These findings suggest that employing low-QE electrodes can help mitigate photoelectric-induced backgrounds, potentially improving the sensitivity of LXe TPCs in light dark matter searches.

2025-03-18, **The galaxy-environment connection revealed by constrained simulations**, Catherine Gallagher et.al., [2503.14732v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14732v1)

 The evolution of galaxies is known to be connected to their position within the large-scale structure and their local environmental density. We investigate the relative importance of these using the underlying dark matter density field extracted from the Constrained Simulations in BORG (CSiBORG) suite of constrained cosmological simulations. We define cosmic web environment through both dark matter densities averaged on a scale up to 16 Mpc/h, and through cosmic web location identified by applying DisPerSE to the CSiBORG haloes. We correlate these environmental measures with the properties of observed galaxies in large surveys using optical data (from the NASA-Sloan Atlas) and 21-cm radio data (from ALFALFA). We find statistically significant correlations between environment and colour, neutral hydrogen gas (HI) mass fraction, star formation rate and S\'ersic index. Together, these correlations suggest that bluer, star forming, HI rich, and disk-type galaxies tend to reside in lower density areas, further from filaments, while redder, more elliptical galaxies with lower star formation rates tend to be found in higher density areas, closer to filaments. We find analogous trends with the quenching of galaxies, but notably find that the quenching of low mass galaxies has a greater dependence on environment than the quenching of high mass galaxies. We find that the relationship between galaxy properties and the environmental density is stronger than that with distance to filament, suggesting that environmental density has a greater impact on the properties of galaxies than their location within the larger-scale cosmic web.

2025-03-18, **Inferring astrophysics and cosmology with individual compact binary coalescences and their gravitational-wave stochastic background**, S. Ferraiuolo et.al., [2503.14686v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14686v1)

 Gravitational waves (GWs) from compact binary coalescences (CBCs) provide a new avenue to probe the cosmic expansion, in particular the Hubble constant $H\_0$. The spectral sirens method is one of the most used techniques for GW cosmology. It consists of obtaining cosmological information from the GW luminosity distance, directly inferred from data, and the redshift that can be implicitly obtained from the source frame mass distribution of the CBC population. With GW detectors, populations of CBCs can be either observed as resolved individual sources or implicitly as a stochastic gravitational-wave background (SGWB) from the unresolved ones. In this manuscript, we study how resolved and unresolved sources of CBCs can be employed in the spectral siren framework to constrain cosmic expansion. The idea stems from the fact that the SGWB can constrain additional population properties of the CBCs thus potentially improving the measurement precision of the cosmic expansion parameters. We show that with a 5-detector network at O5-designed sensitivity, the inclusion of the SGWB will improve our ability to exclude low values of $H\_0$ and the dark matter energy fraction $\Omega\_m$, while also improving the determination of a possible CBC peak in redshift. Although low values of $H\_0$ and $\Omega\_m$ will be better constrained, we obtain that most on the precsion on $H\_0$ will be provided by resolved spectral sirens. We also performed a spectral siren analysis for 59 resolved binary black hole sources detected during the third observing run with an inverse false alarm rate higher than 1 per year jointly with the SGWB. We obtain that with current sensitivities, the cosmological and population results are not impacted by the inclusion of the SGWB.

2025-03-18, **Cosmological gravitational particle production: Starobinsky vs Bogolyubov, uncertainties, and issues**, Duarte Feiteira et.al., [2503.14652v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14652v1)

 We study production of free and feebly interacting scalars during inflation using the Bogolyubov coefficient and Starobinsky stochastic approaches. While the two methods agree in the limit of infinitely long inflation, the Starobinsky approach is more suitable for studying realistic situations, where the duration of inflation is finite and the scalar field has non-trivial initial conditions. We find that the abundance of produced particles is sensitive to pre-inflationary initial conditions, resulting in the uncertainty of many orders of magnitude. Nevertheless, a lower bound on the particle abundance can be obtained. High scale inflation is very efficient in particle production, which leads to strong constraints on the existence of stable scalars with masses below the inflationary Hubble rate. For example, free stable scalars are allowed only if they have masses below an eV or the reheating temperature is in the GeV range or below. We find universal scaling behavior of the particle abundance, which covers free and feebly interacting scalars as well as those with a small non-minimal coupling to gravity. These considerations are important in the context of non-thermal dark matter since inflationary particle production provides an irreducible background for other production mechanisms.

2025-03-18, **Probing Benchmark Models of Hidden-Sector Dark Matter with DAMIC-M**, DAMIC-M Collaboration et.al., [2503.14617v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14617v1)

 We report on a search for sub-GeV dark matter (DM) particles interacting with electrons using the DAMIC-M prototype detector at the Modane Underground Laboratory. The data feature a significantly lower detector single $e^-$ rate (factor 50) compared to our previous search, while also accumulating a ten times larger exposure of $\sim$1.3 kg-day. DM interactions in the skipper charge-coupled devices (CCDs) are searched for as patterns of two or three consecutive pixels with a total charge between 2 and 4 $e^-$. We find 144 candidates of 2 $e^-$ and 1 candidate of 4 $e^-$, where 141.5 and 0.071, respectively, are expected from background. With no evidence of a DM signal, we place stringent constraints on DM particles with masses between 1 and 1000 MeV/$c^2$ interacting with electrons through an ultra-light or heavy mediator. For large ranges of DM masses below 1 GeV/c$^2$, we exclude theoretically-motivated benchmark scenarios where hidden-sector particles are produced as a major component of DM in the Universe through the freeze-in or freeze-out mechanisms.

2025-03-18, **Search for dark matter subhalos among unassociated Fermi-LAT sources in presence of dataset shift**, Aurelio Amerio et.al., [2503.14584v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14584v1)

 We search for dark matter (DM) annihilating subhalos of the Milky Way halo among the Fermi Large Area Telescope (LAT) unassociated sources. We construct, for the first time, a statistical model of the unassociated sources at latitudes above 10 degrees. The latter is built as a combination of both DM annihilation subhalos as well as Galactic and extragalactic astrophysical components. The astrophysical components are constructed based on distributions of associated sources, while the distribution of DM subhalos is derived from Monte Carlo simulations. In this model we take into account the differences in the distributions of associated and unassociated sources including both covariate and prior probability shifts (both being forms of ``dataset shifts''). Previous searches of DM subhalos were based on classify-and-count strategies, while the approach adopted in this work is based on quantification learning, which allows one to determine a well-defined statistical interpretation of the contribution of a population of DM subhalos to the unassociated Fermi-LAT sources. In the $b\bar{b}$ annihilation channel and for a range of DM masses from 10 GeV to 1 TeV, we don't find a significant contribution from DM subhalos and derive a statistical 95% confidence upper limit on the DM annihilation cross section in this channel. While the derived limits are consistent with previous classify-and-count approaches, our generative statistical model opens new avenues for population studies of Fermi-LAT sources and, more generally, for searches of anomalies on top of backgrounds in presence of statistical and systematic uncertainties.

2025-03-18, **Impacts of Primordial Black Holes in the Early Universe**, Jacob Gunn et.al., [2503.14583v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14583v1)

 The work presented in this thesis draws back the curtain on the physics of the primordial universe by leveraging Primordial Black Holes (PBHs) as cosmological probes. The violent deaths of ultralight PBHs are shown to severely inhibit leptogenesis, alter the sphaleron freeze-out temperature and provide an opportunity to rule out models of leptogenesis which would otherwise evade direct detection experiments for effective eternity. Turning to the extreme temperature gradients of hot spots, the evolution and formation of hot spots was considered in an expanding background for the first time, and a formalism treating the propagation of Hawking radiation was introduced. Upon addressing the previously unexplored effects of hot spots on Hawking radiation, it was discovered that hot spots can support successful leptogenesis after sphaleron freeze-out, and efficiently absorb radiated Dark Matter. These examples hint at an intricate, rich tapestry of physics in hot spots.

2025-03-18, **Shedding Infrared Light on QCD Axion and ALP Dark Matter with JWST**, Akash Kumar Saha et.al., [2503.14582v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14582v1)

 James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) has opened up a new chapter in infrared astronomy. Besides the discovery and a deeper understanding of various astrophysical sources, JWST can also uncover the non-gravitational nature of dark matter (DM). If DM is QCD axion or an eV-scale Axion-like particle (ALP), it can decay into two photons in the infrared band. This will produce a distinct line signature in the spectroscopic observations made by JWST. Using the latest NIRSpec IFU spectroscopic observations from JWST, we put the strongest bound on the photon coupling for QCD axion/ ALP DM in the mass range between 0.47 and 2.55 eV. In particular, we are able to probe a new mass range for ALP DM between $\sim$ 0.47 eV to 0.78 eV beyond what can be probed by globular cluster observations. We constrain well-motivated and UV complete models of QCD axion and ALP DM, including predictions from some models derived from string theory and/ or various Grand Unification scenarios. Future JWST observations of DM-rich systems with a better understanding of the astrophysical and instrumental backgrounds can thus enable us to potentially discover QCD axion and ALP DM. The datasets used in this work are available at: https://dx.doi.org/10.17909/3e5f-nv69

2025-03-18, **The Atacama Cosmology Telescope: DR6 Power Spectra, Likelihoods and $Λ$CDM Parameters**, Thibaut Louis et.al., [2503.14452v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14452v1)

 We present power spectra of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) anisotropy in temperature and polarization, measured from the Data Release 6 maps made from Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT) data. These cover 19,000 deg$^2$ of sky in bands centered at 98, 150 and 220 GHz, with white noise levels three times lower than Planck in polarization. We find that the ACT angular power spectra estimated over 10,000 deg$^2$, and measured to arcminute scales in TT, TE and EE, are well fit by the sum of CMB and foregrounds, where the CMB spectra are described by the $\Lambda$CDM model. Combining ACT with larger-scale Planck data, the joint P-ACT dataset provides tight limits on the ingredients, expansion rate, and initial conditions of the universe. We find similar constraining power, and consistent results, from either the Planck power spectra or from ACT combined with WMAP data, as well as from either temperature or polarization in the joint P-ACT dataset. When combined with CMB lensing from ACT and Planck, and baryon acoustic oscillation data from the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI Y1), we measure a baryon density of $\Omega\_b h^2=0.0226\pm0.0001$, a cold dark matter density of $\Omega\_c h^2=0.118\pm0.001$, a Hubble constant of $H\_0=68.22\pm0.36$ km/s/Mpc, a spectral index of $n\_s=0.974\pm0.003$, and an amplitude of density fluctuations of $\sigma\_8=0.813\pm0.005$. We find no evidence for excess lensing in the power spectrum, and no departure from spatial flatness. The contribution from Sunyaev-Zel'dovich (SZ) anisotropy is detected at high significance; we find evidence for a tilt with suppressed small-scale power compared to our baseline SZ template spectrum, consistent with hydrodynamical simulations with feedback.

2025-03-18, **Study of gravitational waves from phase transitions in three-component dark matter**, Mohammad Hossein Rahimi Abkenar et.al., [2503.14300v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14300v1)

 This paper presents a dark matter model comprising three types of particles with distinct spins, along with a scalar field $\phi$ that mediates interactions between Standard Model particles and dark matter. It discusses the electroweak phase transition following the Big Bang, during which all particles are initially massless due to the inactive Higgs mechanism. As temperature decreases, the effective potential reaches zero at two points, leading to two minima at the critical temperature ($T\_c$), and eventually to a true vacuum state. The formation of new vacuum bubbles, where electroweak symmetry is broken and particles acquire mass, generates gravitational waves as these bubbles interact with the fabric of space-time. The paper derives the gravitational wave frequency and detection range based on the model's parameters, aligning with observational data from the Planck satellite and detection thresholds from PandaX-4T. It concludes by comparing the predicted background gravitational wave density with the sensitivities of LISA and BBO detectors.

2025-03-18, **Populating Large N-body Simulations with LRGs Using Neural Networks**, M. Icaza-Lizaola et.al., [2503.14193v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14193v1)

 The analysis of state-of-the-art cosmological surveys like the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) survey requires high-resolution, large-volume simulations. However, the computational cost of hydrodynamical simulations at these scales is prohibitive. Instead, dark matter (DM)-only simulations are used, with galaxies populated a posteriori, typically via halo occupation distribution (HOD) models. While effective, HOD models are statistical in nature and lack full physical motivation.   In this work, we explore using neural networks (NNs) to learn the complex, physically motivated relationships between DM haloes and galaxy properties. Trained on small-volume, high-resolution hydrodynamical simulations, our NN predicts galaxy properties in a larger DM-only simulation and determines which galaxies should be classified as luminous red galaxies (LRGs).   Comparing the original LRG sample to the one generated by our NN, we find that, while the subhalo mass distributions are similar, our NN selects fewer low-mass subhaloes as LRG hosts, possibly due to the absence of baryonic feedback effects in DM-only simulations. This feedback could brighten or redden galaxies, altering their classification.   Finally, we generate a new LRG sample by fitting an HOD model to the NN-generated LRG sample. We verify that both the HOD- and NN-generated samples preserve a set of bias parameter relations, which assume that the higher-order parameters, $b\_{s2}$ and $b\_{3\rm{nl}}$, are determined by the linear bias parameter $b\_{1}$. These relations are commonly used to simplify clustering analyses.

2025-03-18, **UNIONS: The Ultraviolet Near-Infrared Optical Northern Survey**, Stephen Gwyn et.al., [2503.13783v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.13783v1)

 The Ultraviolet Near-Infrared Optical Northern Survey (UNIONS) is a "collaboration of collaborations" that is using the Canada-France-Hawai'i Telescope, the Pan-STARRS telescopes, and the Subaru Observatory to obtain $ugriz$ images of a core survey region of 6250 deg$^2$ of the northern sky. The $10\sigma$ point source depth of the data, as measured within a 2-arcsecond diameter aperture, are $[u,g,r,i,z] = [23.7, 24.5, 24.2, 23.8, 23.3]$\ in AB magnitudes. UNIONS is addressing some of the most fundamental questions in astronomy, including the properties of dark matter, the growth of structure in the Universe from the very smallest galaxies to large-scale structure, and the assembly of the Milky Way. It is set to become the major ground-based legacy survey for the northern hemisphere for the next decade and provides an essential northern complement to the static-sky science of the Vera C. Rubin Observatory's Legacy Survey of Space and Time. UNIONS supports the core science mission of the {\it Euclid} space mission by providing the data necessary in the northern hemisphere for the calibration of the wavelength dependence of the {\it Euclid} point-spread function and derivation of photometric redshifts in the North Galactic Cap. This region contains the highest quality sky for {\it Euclid}, with low backgrounds from the zodiacal light, stellar density, extinction, and emission from Galactic cirrus. Here, we describe the UNIONS survey components, science goals, data products, and the current status of the overall program.

# supernova (10)

2025-03-19, **Spectroscopy of Supernova Remnants and Candidates in M31**, Nelson Caldwell et.al., [2503.15423v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15423v1)

 With a star formation rate of order 0.4 M$\_\odot $ yr$^{-1}$, M31 should have significant population of supernova remnants (SNRs), and, in fact, 156 SNR and SNR candidates have been suggested by Lee et al. (2014) by searching for nebulae with elevated [SII]/H${\alpha}$ ratios in narrow band images. Here we use a combination of low and high resolution optical spectroscopy obtained with Hectospec on the MMT to characterize 152 of these nebulae. Of these candidates, we find 93 nebulae that have [SII]/H${\alpha}$ ratios that exceed 0.4, the traditional ratio used to separate SNRs from HII regions, strongly suggesting that at least these objects are SNRs. Our high resolution spectroscopy reveals 108 nebulae that have velocity widths in H${\alpha} $ (full-width at 20% peak flux) that exceed 50 km s$^{-1}$, significantly larger than found in HII regions. There are 72 objects that satisfy both tests. Here we discuss the spectroscopic characteristics of all of the objects in our sample, and the likelihood that other objects in the sample of Lee et al. are also SNRs, and we briefly consider confirmation by X-ray, radio and UV observations. We also discuss several new candidates that have been identified serendipitously in the course of examining a large amount of archival Hectospec data.

2025-03-19, **Euclid: Quick Data Release (Q1) - Photometric studies of known transients**, C. Duffy et.al., [2503.15334v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15334v1)

 We report on serendipitous \Euclid observations of previously known transients, using the \Euclid Q1 data release. By cross-matching with the Transient Name Server (TNS) we identify 164 transients that coincide with the data release. Although the \Euclid Q1 release only includes single-epoch data, we are able to make \Euclid photometric measurements at the location of 161 of these transients. \Euclid obtained deep photometric measurements or upper limits of these transients in the \IE, \YE, \JE, and \HE bands at various phases of the transient light-curves, including before, during, and after the observations of ground-based transient surveys. Approximately 70\% of known transients reported in the six months before the \Euclid observation date and with discovery magnitude brighter than 24 were detected in \Euclid $\IE$ images. Our observations include one of the earliest near-infrared detections of a Type~Ia supernova (SN~2024pvw) 15~days prior to its peak brightness, and the late-phase (435.9~days post peak) observations of the enigmatic core-collapse SN~2023aew. \Euclid deep photometry provides valuable information on the nature of these transients such as their progenitor systems and power sources, with late time observations being a uniquely powerful contribution. In addition, \Euclid is able to detect the host galaxies of some transients that were previously classed as hostless. The Q1 data demonstrate the power of the \Euclid data even with only single-epoch observations available, as will be the case for much larger areas of sky in the Euclid Wide Survey.

2025-03-19, **Exploring magnetised galactic outflows in starburst dwarf galaxies NGC 3125 and IC 4662**, Sam Taziaux et.al., [2503.15067v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15067v1)

 The study of radio emission in starburst dwarf galaxies provides a unique opportunity to investigate the mechanisms responsible for the amplification and transport of magnetic fields. Local dwarfs are often considered proxies for early-Universe galaxies, so this study may provide insights into the role of non-thermal components in the formation and evolution of larger galaxies. By investigating the radio continuum spectra and maps of the starburst dwarf galaxies, we aim to draw conclusions on their magnetic field strengths and configurations, as well as the dynamics of cosmic ray (CR) transport. We perform a radio continuum polarimetry study of two of the brightest starburst IRAS Revised Bright Galaxy Sample (RBGS) dwarf galaxies, NGC 3125 and IC 4662. By combining data of the Australian Telescope Compact Array (2.1 GHz) and MeerKAT (1.28 GHz), we analyse the underlying emission mechanism and the CR transport in these systems. We find flat spectra in those dwarf galaxies over the entire investigated frequency range, which sharply contrasts with observations of massive spiral galaxies. Because the expected cooling time of CR electrons is much shorter than their escape time, we would expect a steepened steady-state CR electron spectrum. The flat observed spectra suggest a substantial contribution from free-free emission at high frequencies and absorption at low frequencies, which may solve this puzzle. For NGC 3125, we measure a degree of polarisation between 0.75% and 2.6%, implying a turbulent field and supporting the picture of a comparably large thermal emission component that could be sourced by stellar radiation feedback and supernovae.

2025-03-19, **V1047 Cen: The first Z And-type outburst observed in the classical nova binary**, Augustin Skopal et.al., [2503.14994v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14994v1)

 In 2019, the classical nova V1047 Cen experienced an unusual outburst, the nature of which has not yet been clearly determined. In this paper, we show that the 2019 V1047~Cen outburst is of Z And-type -- a type that is characteristic and has so far been observed only in symbiotic binaries. We support our claim by modeling the near-ultraviolet to near-infrared spectral energy distribution, which revealed a close similarity between the fundamental parameters and the mass-loss rate of the burning white dwarf during the 2019 V1047 Cen outburst and those measured during Z And-type outbursts in symbiotic stars. All parameters are in agreement with the theoretical prediction when the accretion rate exceeds the stable burning limit for white dwarfs with masses less than 0.7 solar units. Our analysis showed that after a nova explosion, the Z And-type outburst can occur not only in symbiotic binaries but also in short-period cataclysmic variables, when the accretion-powered system changes to a nuclear-powered one, as a consequence of the donor's reaction to the nova explosion. Such a development promotes the production of Type Ia supernovae.

2025-03-19, **Constraining Axially Symmetric Bianchi Type I Model with Self-Consistent Recombination History and Observables**, Boris Hoi-Lun Ng et.al., [2503.14969v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14969v1)

 Recent cosmological measurements suggest the possibility of an anisotropic universe. As a result, the Bianchi Type I model, being the simplest anisotropic extension to the standard Friedmann-Lema\^itre-Robertson-Walker metric has been extensively studied. In this work, we show how the recombination history should be modified in an anisotropic universe and derive observables by considering the null geodesic. We then constrain the axially symmetric Bianchi Type I model by performing Markov Chain Monte Carlo with the acoustic scales in Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) and Baryon Acoustic Oscillation data, together with local measurements of $H(z)$ and Pantheon Supernova data. Our results reveal that the anisotropic model is not worth a bare mention compared to the $\Lambda$CDM model, and we obtain a tight constraint on the anisotropy that generally agrees with previous studies under a maximum temperature anisotropy fraction of $2\times 10^{-5}$. To allow for a non-kinematic CMB dipole, we also present constraints based on a relaxed maximum temperature anisotropy comparable to that of the CMB dipole. We stress that there is a significant difference between the geodesic-based observables and the naive isotropic analogies when there is a noticeable anisotropy. However, the changes in recombination history are insignificant even under the relaxed anisotropy limit.

2025-03-18, **Extended Dark Energy analysis using DESI DR2 BAO measurements**, DESI Collaboration et.al., [2503.14743v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14743v1)

 We conduct an extended analysis of dark energy constraints, in support of the findings of the DESI DR2 cosmology key paper, including DESI data, Planck CMB observations, and three different supernova compilations. Using a broad range of parametric and non-parametric methods, we explore the dark energy phenomenology and find consistent trends across all approaches, in good agreement with the $w\_0w\_a$CDM key paper results. Even with the additional flexibility introduced by non-parametric approaches, such as binning and Gaussian Processes, we find that extending $\Lambda$CDM to include a two-parameter $w(z)$ is sufficient to capture the trends present in the data. Finally, we examine three dark energy classes with distinct dynamics, including quintessence scenarios satisfying $w \geq -1$, to explore what underlying physics can explain such deviations. The current data indicate a clear preference for models that feature a phantom crossing; although alternatives lacking this feature are disfavored, they cannot yet be ruled out. Our analysis confirms that the evidence for dynamical dark energy, particularly at low redshift ($z \lesssim 0.3$), is robust and stable under different modeling choices.

2025-03-18, **The curious case of EP241021a: Unraveling the mystery of its exceptional rebrightening**, Malte Busmann et.al., [2503.14588v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14588v1)

 Fast X-ray Transients (FXTs) are a rare and poorly understood phenomenon with a variety of possible progenitors. The launch of the Einstein Probe (EP) mission has facilitated a rapid increase in the real-time discovery and follow-up of FXTs. We focus on the recent EP discovered transient EP241021a, which shows a peculiar panchromatic behavior. We obtained optical and near-infrared multi-band imaging and spectroscopy with the Fraunhofer Telescope at Wendelstein Observatory, the Hobby-Eberly Telescope, and the Very Large Telescope over the first 100 days of its evolution. EP241021a was discovered by EP as a soft X-ray trigger, but was not detected at gamma-ray frequencies. The observed soft X-ray prompt emission spectrum is consistent with non-thermal radiation, which requires at least a mildly relativistic outflow with bulk Lorentz factor $\Gamma \gtrsim 4$. The optical and near-infrared lightcurve has a two component behavior where an initially fading component $\sim t^{-1}$ turns to a rise steeper than $\sim t^{4}$ after a few days before peaking at $M\_r\approx -22$ mag and quickly returning to the initial decay. The peak absolute magnitude is the most luminous optical emission associated to an FXT, superseding EP240414a. Standard supernova models are unable to reproduce either the absolute magnitude or rapid timescale ($<2$ d) of the rebrightening. The X-ray, optical and near-infrared spectral energy distributions display a red color $r-J\approx 1$ mag, and point to a non-thermal origin ($\nu^{-1}$) for the broadband emission. By considering a gamma-ray burst as a plausible scenario, we favor a refreshed shock as the cause of the rebrightening. This is consistent with the inference of an at least mildly relativistic outflow based on the prompt trigger. Our results suggest a likely link between EP discovered FXTs and low luminosity gamma-ray bursts.

2025-03-18, **Forming a clumpy circumstellar material in energetic pre-supernova activity**, Shlomi Hillel et.al., [2503.14438v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14438v1)

 We demonstrate by three-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations of energy deposition into the envelope of a red supergiant (RSG) model the inflation of a Rayleigh-Taylor unstable envelope that forms a compact clumpy circumstellar material (CSM). Our simulations mimic vigorous core activity years to months before a core-collapse supernova (CCSN) explosion that deposits energy to the outer envelope. The fierce core nuclear activity in the pre-CCSN explosion phase might excite waves that propagate to the envelope. The wave energy is dissipated where envelope convection cannot carry the energy. We deposit this energy into a shell in the outer envelope with a power of L(wave)=2.6e6Lo or L(wave)=5.2e5Lo for 0.32 year. The energy-deposition shell expands while its pressure is higher than its surroundings, but its density is lower. Therefore, this expansion is Rayleigh-Taylor unstable and develops instability fingers. Most of the inflated envelope does not reach the escape velocity in the year of simulation but forms a compact and clumpy CSM. The high density of the inflated envelope implies that if a companion is present in that zone, it will accrete mass at a very high rate and power a pre-explosion outburst.

2025-03-18, **Over-Luminous Type Ia Supernovae and Standard Candle Cosmology**, Abhinandan Ravi et.al., [2503.13904v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.13904v1)

 Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) serve as crucial cosmological distance indicators due to their empirical consistency in peak luminosity and characteristic light-curve decline rates. These properties facilitate them to be standardized candles for the determination of the Hubble constant ($H\_0$) within late-time universe cosmology. Nevertheless, a statistically significant difference persists between $H\_0$ values derived from early and late-time measurements, a phenomenon known as the Hubble tension. Furthermore, recent observations have identified a subset of over-luminous SNe Ia, characterized by peak luminosities exceeding the nominal range and faster decline rates. These discoveries raise questions regarding the reliability of SNe Ia as standard candles in measuring cosmological distances. In this article, we present the Bayesian analysis of eight over-luminous SNe Ia and show that they yield a lower $H\_0$ estimates, exhibiting closer concordance with $H\_0$ estimates derived from early-universe data. This investigation potentially represent a step toward addressing the Hubble tension.

2025-03-18, **Formation and evolution of new primordial open cluster groups: Feedback-driven star formation**, Guimei Liu et.al., [2503.13892v1](http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.13892v1)

 The formation mechanisms of open cluster (OCs) groups remain unclear due to limited sample sizes and data precision. Recent advancements in Gaia astrometric data provide an unprecedented opportunity to study OC groups in greater detail. This study aims to extend the sample of OC groups and investigate their formation and evolution mechanisms, with a focus on the role of stellar feedback in triggering star formation. We identify four new OC groups based on Gaia data, whose member OCs are spatially proximate and kinematically coherent. Their age spreads are consistent with the timescale of continuous star formation, suggesting that their member OCs formed sequentially from the same molecular cloud. N-body simulation results further reveal that these groups will gradually disperse, evolving into independent OCs. By analyzing the correlation between OC ages and their separation from potential SN explosion sites, we predict SN explosion regions around the birthplaces of OC groups. The strong correlation between OC ages and predicted SN explosion sites supports a supernova-triggered star formation scenario. Additionally, we trace pulsar (PSR) orbits to examine their association with these regions. We detected three PSRs near Group 1 and 26 PSRs near Group 2, whose birthplaces align with the predicted SN explosions regions. The presence of PSRs associated with OC groups provides additional observational evidence for SN explosions in this region, further supporting a supernova-triggered star formation scenario for G1 and G2. We propose that multiple SN explosions in a short period triggered the formation of Group 1 and Group 2, reinforcing the hierarchical star formation model. These results highlight the multi-scale interactions driving star and OC formation and provide new insights into the role of stellar feedback in shaping OC groups.

